---
id: 20240919T0853-going-home
aliases:
  - going home
tags: []
---

#engelsk [[20240901T0811-engelsk|engelsk]] [[20240917T0607-literary-devices|literary-devices]] [[20240916T0636-reading-literature]]

# Analysis of going home

Example analysis: [google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Dn2YLG3jbFWArY6TOjHWb-PHoZ_MDl-EhrL6WCL8pKc/edit)

Ernest Hemingway coined the term "iceberg theory", about the visible and the deeper parts of culture.

Minimalization is the writing style used in the text. On the top, it consists of concise words, but has a deeper meaning.

## Description of Vingo (the main character)

- Ex-convict
- On bus with six young people
- Sent a letter to wife 1.5 years ago, and didn't have any more contact after that
- Sent another one a week before leaving about putting a yellow handkerchief on a tree
- Saw yellow on the tree and want home

- night -> morning: new start, going from past to new life, takes a long time
- spring
- gray end cold => sad and gloomy atmosphere

The long bus ride can symbolize a big change towards freedom after being in prison, and:

- Hope
- Forgiveness
- Family
- Identity
- Judgment
- Freedom
- Redemption
- Freedom

## Analysis

### Title and date of publication:

“Going Home”
2020

### Author:

Pete Hamill

### Plot: The events that make up the action in the story (5–10 sentences)

Vingo is sitting alone on a bus on the way from New York to Florida. While approaching New Jersey, they notice that Vingo didn’t talk or move at all, and one of the girls sits next to him and tries to talk to him.
She finds out that he has been in prison for the past four years. He initially sent a letter to his wife before going to jail, saying that he would be okay with her leaving him and being with another for the time. A week before being released, he sent another letter to his wife, saying that if she wanted him to come back, she could put a yellow handkerchief on a big tree in Brunswick, and he would get off the bus and come to her. All the others on the bus look out the window when they are close to the stop, and they all celebrate when seeing that there are a lot of yellow handkerchiefs covering the tree.

### Setting:

> Time – when the story takes place
> Place – where the story takes place
> Effect: Does the setting help establish mood or atmosphere?

The text doesn’t state the exact time period it is set in, however seeing as Vingo communicated with his wife through sending letters, I assume that it’s not set very recently. Additionally, he smokes a lot, which would not be as accepted in the more modern society.
It takes place on a bus ride from New York to Florida, where he’s on a bus together with six other people, three of them boys and three of them girls.
The setting establishes a cheerful atmosphere amongst the six other people when they notice the yellow handkerchiefs while going past the tree. It also says a lot about how the people are, Vingo being reluctant to talk at first, then talking about having been in Jail for the past years.

### Point of view: The perspective from which the writer presents information

> First-person point of view – I or we
> Third-person point of view – he, she, it, they
> Omniscient narrator – has unlimited knowledge of the characters

The story is being told from a third-person point of view. Vingo is being referred to with his name, while the others on the bus are called “he” or “she”. This indicates that the narrator is not omniscient, because they don’t know the names, and the contents of the text are about what’s visible from the outside of the characters and not about what the people are thinking. I think that Vingo has a lot going on in his mind while on the bus ride, but was staying calm and not wanting to talk to other people about it.

### Characters:

> Protagonist, antagonist and minor characters

The main character in this text is Vingo. He says that he was previously in Florida while in the navy. He had been in jail for the past four yeast and was now hoping to go home to his wife. He smokes a lot and sits alone in the front of the bus. He doesn’t know whether or not his wife has left him or not, because he didn’t get any letter back after telling her he would be okay no matter what she did, but sent one before leaving the prison, asking her to put a yellow handkerchief on a big tree if she wanted him to come back.
The other characters in this story are the six younger people on the bus, who are supportive of the main character, and the whife who doesn’t directly appear in the story. She doesn’t say anything in the story, but Vingo showed pictures of his wife and his children, and she seemed like she was loyal, wanting Vingo to come home again after being in prison.

### Characterization: Describing the characters

> Appearance – What the character looks like
> Action – How the character behaves
> Thoughts – What the character thinks
> Speech – What the character says and how he says it
> Reaction of others – How others react to this character
> Development – How and why the character changes
> Static characters do not change; dynamic characters change and develop throughout the story.

Vingo is silent and reluctant to talk during the first part of the bus ride, but starts talking more later on the bus ride. He is older than the rest of the people on the bus.
The one girl that talks to Vingo is more extroverted and wants to find out more. The six younger people speculate about who he is and talk to him after the bus stops as a cafe.
The main character changes and shares a lot about his life later on, and all of them are happy when they see the yello handkerchiefs on the tree. Vingo is a very dynamic character who develops throughout the story, while the others are more static and always wanting to learn more about him.

### Main conflict(s): Is there an internal or external struggle?

Is the character fighting against himself/herself or against other characters?
This is mostly an internal struggle, with Vingo hoping for his wife to want him back. He is fighting against his own internal emotions thinking about the different things that can happen, and is relieved when the bus gets there.

### Climax: The point of highest interest in the story; usually a turning point. How does this point solve the main issue in the story?

The point of highest interest in the story is around these sentences: “Then it was ten miles, then five. Vingo was trembling. The noise of people faded and the bus became very quiet.”. Right before this, it says that Vingo stopped looking, and looked like he was preparing to be disappointed, then a turning point came when he saw the tree, and this solved the main issue in the story, being that Vingo is unsure whether or not his wife wants him back after being in prison.

### Theme: The central idea in a literary text, what the story is really about, often a more general idea Message is what the writer wants to convey about this theme, sometimes the moral of the story.

This story is about coming back and wanting someone to come back. The yellow ribbon, or handkerchief in this instance, can represent welcoming someone home after having been away for a long time, forgiveness, and acceptance.

### Literary devices (see page 69):

> metaphors, symbols, alliteration, dialogue, repetition, foreshadowing, flashback, allusion, etc.
> In the beginning, contrast is used between “golden beaches and blue sea” and “the grey, cold spring of New York” as a difference between a warm and cold environment.

“Vingo stopped looking, tightening his face as if expecting another disappointment.” is an example of foreshadowing, but it turns out to be false, as he is not disappointed by the outcome.

“The tree stood like a banner of welcome” is an example of simile, using the word “like” to compare the tree to a banner of welcome.

In addition, “The tree stood like a banner of welcome, blowing and billowing in the wind.” can be an example of personification, where the tree is represented as a loving and welcoming person of Vingo.

Vingo not being sure whether he has a wife or not can be an example of irony; he thinks that his wife has moved on, but is met by the complete opposite when he sees a tree completely covered in yellow.
