---
id: 20250211T1255-ireland
aliases:
  - ireland
tags: []
date: "2025-02-11"
title: Ireland
---

#engelsk [[20250203T0726-northern-ireland|northern ireland]]

# ireland

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1p3GIQon5Ivk7IZXDAJVtHofLUPPpKuGdotkpaYTVw3s/edit#slide=id.g2af72d5cc90_0_7

The republic of Ireland

- Independent state
- 4.8 million people
- Capital: Dublin
- Currency: € EUR
- Head of state: Elected president
- 78% Catholic
- 80% want to stay in EU

Dublin was established by the vikings.

https://ndla.no/nb/r/engelsk-sf/an-introduction-to-ireland/c287015b71

second largest island in the British isles
mild climate
green rolling landscape
Gulf Stream, close to Atlantic Ocean

4.7 mill people.
Capital: Dublin

Joined EU in 1973
New and better paid jobs, 1970s
Increased population by 400 000 in 10 years
Agriculture based -> knowledge-based economy
Economy: "The Celtic Tiger" from mid-1990s to late 2000s
(pronounced "keltic")
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celtic_Tiger

1999: Corporate Tax Reform: 32% -> 12.5%
FDI - Foreign direct investment
After the reform, many international companies moved to Ireland
PayPal, IBM, Ericsson etc (tech giants), have their headquarters in Ireland

"The green island"
Darker past

Potato famine 1845
potato disease - "blight"
7 years, mass starvation
Widespread disease and death, >1 million deaths
1 mill emigrated to USA to escape poverty and starvation
John Mitchel claimed that it was artificial, and caused by the British.

1916 Uprising
Easter: Irish Republicans organized a rebellion for Irish independence
Suppressed after 7 days
Five years later granted freedom
1921: Partial independence, Irish Free State, divided into two parts
1949: Complete independence, Republic of Ireland

1916 Uprising / the Easter Rising

Fought for seven days
16 leaders of the uprising were executed by British authorities.
Outrage, increased support for Irish independence.

Limerick
Third largest city
15 mins by car from Shannon airport
Also a poem of five lines
AABBA end-rhyme
6-6-4-4-6 meters

> [!NOTE] Example:
> The limerick packs laughs anatomical
> In space that is quite economical,
> But the good ones I've seen
> So seldom are clean,
> And the clean ones so seldom are comical.

Follows an anapestic meter
two unstressed syllables, one stressed.
Called a "foot".

> There **once** / was a **man** / from Pe**ru**
> Who **dreamed** / he was **eating** / his **shoe**
> He **awoke** / with a **fright**
> In the **middle** / of the **night**
> To **find** / that his **dream** / had come **true**

("/" separating feet)

## Potato famine: documentary

Potatoes:
Nutrient-rich
Easier for less rich families
Irelands more valuable agricultural products were exported
Most of the population (8 mill) lived entirely on potatoes
Potatoes were blackend and shiveled
People had stomach aches etc. from eating them
"Phytophtora infestans" - "blight"
Fungus originating form the Americas
Destroyed potato harvests across Europe

Ireland was almost entirely dependent
Class crisis
National catastrophe
1845: part of the United Kingdom
British imported corn from North America, offered employment on public work projects.
Less nutrition in the food
More prone to disease
British continued to export the grain and livestock from Ireland.

Thomas Malone
Walked 18 km round trip to+from work every day.
Collapsed and died before reaching home, leaving wife and six children

Many families managed to scrape by

1846: 75% impacted, blight
Government limited who was eligible for relief, increased taxes.

Policies stemming from religious policies stc.
British depicted as lazy, simple-minded alcoholics.
Famine was God's punishment for sinful behavior.
Not a lack of resources, but a lack of political will from the British.

1852, the weather returned to normal, and the potato crop stabilized.
1 million dies.
1-2 million emigrated
Halved population
With climate change, many more facing similar problems.

### Tasks

1. Why did John say the English created the Famine?

The famine was originally caused by a fungus called Phytophthora infestans, informally known as blight. This ruined their potato crop, causing the most important food source to disappear. In the beginning, they received some help from the British, importing corn from North America. However, this corn was not as nutritious as the potatoes they previously had. In addition, the British decided to limit who were eligible for this help, and did not give enough help. The impact of the famine could have been significantly decreased if the United Kingdom helped them more, as they did have the means to use it, but decided not to because of a lack of political will.

Kept exporting food form Ireland
Food of low nutrition imported from North America
Lack of quality control
Increased the taxes
Offered ineffective employment on public work projects

2. What were the main factors that led to the Irish Potato Famine? How did political, social, and economic conditions contribute to the crisis?

blight
climate
continued export
single food dependency

Social and economic class division
rich had it better
politics - exported the food from Ireland, leaving them with no food left.

3. How did the famine affect the population of Ireland in terms of mortality and emigration?

8.5 million
1 mill dies
2 mill emigradet
5.1 mill after the famine
Still emigrated after the famine because of fear
4.3 million
Today: 5.2 mill

4. What lessons can be learned from the Irish Potato Famine that are relevant to addressing food security and agricultural sustainability today?

To help out of compassion rather than meet them with judgement as the British did to the Irish during the famine.
Industry and climate change leading to unstable weather, which was one of the factors in the Irish famine.
