---
id: 20250106T0740-canada
aliases:
  - canada
tags: []
date: "2024-01-06"
title: Canada
---

#engelsk [[20240901T0811-engelsk|engelsk]] [[20250106T0844-usa-and-canada|usa and canada]]

# Canada

- Bilingual
  - French in Quebec

northernmost country in north america
border to the USA
8890 kilometer, longest international border
9974670 sq km area
second largest in the owrld by size, behind russia
11.76% is water
largest coastline, around 243 000 km
"amari usque ad mare" - from sea to sea
40 million popularion
divided into 10 provinces and 3 territories

many terrain types

- rainforest in the west coast
  flat plains western center
  boreal forest center and east
  tundra in the north

52 thousand island
mount logan 5959 meters, highest mountain. yukont erritori
great bear lake 31 328 sq km, largest lake
614 deepest lake - great slave lake, northwest

resources

- lumber
- agriculture
- oil
- minteals
- fishing, but not as important
- beaver pelt

european demand for beaver fur historically
beavers are canada's national animal

climate

- cold
- minus 63 degreses 1947 feb 3rd, lowest temp in yukon territory
  vancouver, toronto are warmer

36 991 981 -> 38 939 056 population 2022 -> 2024

Ontario most populous province. Second most populous: quebec.
Quebec is french

Toronto is Canada's largest city, and the most diverse city in the word
immigration and multiculturalism

Montreal, calgary, ottawa are largest after

Charles the third: the monarch
Prime minister Justin Trudeau. 23rd
Elected first in 2015

Anthem O Canada

Flag with a read maple leaf

Currency: Canadian dollar
1\$ coin is a "loonie"
2\$ coin: "toonie"

9th largest evonomi
2.14 trillion $

5.7% unemployment rate

779.2 billion dollars ecxport
752 billion dollars import

USA is the largest trading partner
98.9 billion US dollars in trade.

Indigenous peoples
First europeans were vikings, in what is now New Foundland, around 11th century
400 more years until next european visit
200 years fights between britain and france

1759: British won the Battle of plains of abraham outside quebec city, ending new france
fought against american troops in 1812 in american revolution
British slowly allowed canadian confederation
Canada become independent
1982 constitution act. _fully_ independent

Displacent of first nation people when moving west. Many indigenous dies from warfare and european diseases.
A lot of indigenous in canada.
Tension between english speakers and french speakers. conflicts in 1970 and 1980.

Canada is affected by everything the US does.
Close political and military allies
Member of NATO
Important in world wars
26.5 million dollars spent on defense
NAFTA in 1984 is a trade agreement between Candaa, USA and Maxigo
Allows for greater trade

Sharea border with greenland (kingdom of denmark)
"Whiskey war" on the island with the border

THe birthplace of ice hockey.
42% of national Hockey league players are canadian
Often win ice hockey

Other sports: basketball, curling, football, soccer
Basketball also invented in Canada

Many artists, actors from the country

Many types of cuisine exist there
Poutine: french fries, gravy, melted cheese curds. National food
Tim Hortons is the most popular coffee chain.

55.3 meters high, was for a long time the tallest free standing structure.

Niagara falls shared with the US
